README.md, before:

# FOND Utilities

Utilities for parsing and manipulating the FOND planning language (those containing non-deterministic `oneof` effects). At this point the system can:

- _Check_ a file contains a legal FOND domain/problem.
- _Normalize_ a FOND planning domain (i.e., have a single top-level oneof clause in the effect).
- _Compute the all-outcome determinization_ of a FOND domain, where each non-deterministic action is replaced with a set of deterministic actions, each encoding one possible effect outcome of the action. A solution in the deterministic version amounts to a weak plan solution in the original FOND problem.
  - Note the determinizer produces another PDDL domain and does not deal with the problem itself, unlike the SAS-based determinizers used in other planners (like [PRP](https://github.com/QuMuLab/planner-for-relevant-policies), [FONDSAT](https://github.com/tomsons22/FOND-SAT), or [CFOND-ASP](https://github.com/ssardina-research/cfond-asp)) that are are based on the SAS translator in [Fast-Downard](https://github.com/aibasel/downward) classical planner and produce a SAS encoding of the determinization of a specific instance planning problem. For these determinizers that output SAS encodings, please refer to the individual planners or the [translator-fond](https://github.com/ssardina-research/translator-fond) repo.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The system accepts effects that are an arbitrary nesting of `oneof`, conditional effects, and `and`. See section [Format allowed on effects](#format-allowed-on-effects) at the bottom about format accepted.

## Install

The fond-utils system can be installed (as a package) directly from its [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/fond-utils/) repository:

```shell
$ pip install fond-utils
```

Alternatively, it can be installed directly from the repo:

```shell
$ pip install git+https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
```

or, clone the repository and install:

```shell
$ git clone https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
$ cd fond-utils
$ pip install .
```

The system already includes a CLI console application `fond-utils` that will generally be the tool to use. To check the installation was successful just run:

```shell
$ fond-utils -h
usage: fond-utils [-h] --input INPUT [--output OUTPUT] [--outproblem OUTPROBLEM] [--prefix PREFIX] [--suffix SUFFIX]
                  [--console]
                  {check,determinize,normalize}

Utilities to process FOND PDDL

positional arguments:
  {check,determinize,normalize}

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --input INPUT         Input domain file
  --output OUTPUT       Output domain file
  --outproblem OUTPROBLEM
                        Optional output problem file
  --prefix PREFIX       Prefix for determinized action outcome identifier (Default: _DETDUP_)
  --suffix SUFFIX       Suffix for determinized action outcome identifier
  --console             Print the domain after processing
```

> [!NOTE]
> The scripts on this system relies on the [pddl](https://github.com/AI-Planning/pddl) parser, which can be easily installed via [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/pddl/) repository (`pip install pddl`). The pddl system relies itself on the [lark](https://lark-parser.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) parsing library. The fond-utils system, however, extends `pddl` to accept single files containing _both_ the domain and the problem instance, and will be extended further to accept labelled outcomes in the effects.

## Quickstart

You can use the fond-utils package in two ways: as a library, and as a CLI tool.

### As a CLI application tool

To just check that the PDDL input file is parsed well, use the command `check` and report to console:

```shell
$ fond-utils check --input https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils/refs/heads/main/tests/domain_03.pddl
```

Since the system is provided as a module `fondutils`, this would be equivalent to:

```shell
$ python -m fondutils check --input https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils/refs/heads/main/tests/domain_03.pddl
```

Note this would work if you have cloned the repo rather than installed the actual package; for example:

```shell
$ git clone https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
$ cd fond-utils
$ python -m fondutils check --input tests/domain_03.pddl
```

### Normalize a domain

To simply perform normalization (i.e., have a single top-level `oneof` clause in the effect):

```shell
$ fond-utils normalize --input tests/domain_05.pddl --output normalized-domain.pddl
```

Example `test/domain_05.pddl` includes some complex (nested) `oneof` effects. The name of the normalized domain will be the original name with suffix `_NORM`.

### All-outcome determinization

To perform the determinization, use the command `determinize`:

```shell
$ fond-utils determinize --input tests/domain_03.pddl --output determinized-domain.pddl
```

The name of the determinized domain will be the original name with suffix `_ALLOUT`.

By default, deterministic versions of non-deterministic actions will be indexed with term `__DETDUP_<n>` (as done by [PRP](https://github.com/QuMuLab/planner-for-relevant-policies)'s original determinizer).

> [!TIP]
> To change the default prefix `_DETDUP_` use the options `--prefix`, and to add a suffix after the number, use `--suffix`. To get the resulting PDDL printed on console use `--console`:

```lisp
$ python -m fondutils determinize --input tests/domain_03.pddl --suffix "_SUF_" --prefix "_PRE_" --console
(define (domain blocks-domain_ALLOUT)
    (:requirements :equality :typing)
    (:types block)
    (:predicates (clear ?b - block)  (emptyhand) (holding ?b - block)  (on ?b1 - block ?b2 - block)  (on-table ?b - block))
    (:action pick-up_PRE_1_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and (holding ?b1) (clear ?b2) (not (emptyhand)) (not (clear ?b1)) (not (on ?b1 ?b2)))
    )
     (:action pick-up_PRE_2_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and (clear ?b2) (on-table ?b1) (not (on ?b1 ?b2)))
    )
     (:action pick-up_PRE_3_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and )
    )
     (:action put-down
        :parameters (?b - block)
        :precondition (holding ?b)
        :effect (and (on-table ?b) (emptyhand) (clear ?b) (not (holding ?b)))
    )
)
...
```

This resulting PDDL domain is now deterministic and can then be used as input to the original [Fast-Downward](https://github.com/aibasel/downward) SAS translator.

### As a library

This is an example of how we can normalize and determinize a PDDL non-deterministic domain programmatically:

```python
import io
import inspect
from pathlib import Path
import requests

from pddl.formatter import domain_to_string
from fondutils.pddl import parse_domain_problem
from fondutils.determizer import determinize
from fondutils.normalizer import normalize

# get a domain from AI-Planning/fond-domains repo
URL_DOMAIN = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-domains/refs/heads/main/benchmarks/blocksworld-2/domain.pddl"
r = requests.get(URL_DOMAIN)
domain_file = io.StringIO(r.content.decode("utf-8"))

domain, _ = parse_domain_problem(domain_file)

# compute the normalization of the domain and print it on console
domain_norm = normalize(domain)
print(domain_to_string(domain_norm))

# compute the determinization of the domain and print it on console
domain_det = determinize(domain)
print(domain_to_string(domain_det))
```

Note the above code uses `fondutils.pddl.parse_domain_problem` for parsing, which can handle files containing both the domain and problem (though in the above example we the file only contains a domain).

## Format allowed on effects

The determinizer accepts effects that are an arbitrary nesting of `oneof`, conditional effects, and `and`.

If the effect is just one `oneof` clause, then it corresponds to the Unary Nondeterminism (1ND) Normal Form without conditionals in:

* Jussi Rintanen: [Expressive Equivalence of Formalisms for Planning with Sensing](https://gki.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/papers/Rintanen03expr.pdf). ICAPS 2003: 185-194

When there are many `oneof` clauses in a top-level `and` effect, the cross-product of all the `oneof` clauses will determine the deterministic actions.

## Authors

* **Sebastian Sardina** ([ssardina](https://github.com/ssardina)) - [RMIT University](https://www.rmit.edu.au)
* **Christian Muise** ([haz](https://github.com/haz)) - [Queen's University](https://www.queensu.ca)

Commit message:

fix prefix and suffix handling on action names #13

README.md, after:

# FOND Utilities

Utilities for parsing and manipulating the FOND planning language (those containing non-deterministic `oneof` effects). At this point the system can:

- _Check_ a file contains a legal FOND domain/problem.
- _Normalize_ a FOND planning domain (i.e., have a single top-level oneof clause in the effect).
- _Compute the all-outcome determinization_ of a FOND domain, where each non-deterministic action is replaced with a set of deterministic actions, each encoding one possible effect outcome of the action. A solution in the deterministic version amounts to a weak plan solution in the original FOND problem.
  - Note the determinizer produces another PDDL domain and does not deal with the problem itself, unlike the SAS-based determinizers used in other planners (like [PRP](https://github.com/QuMuLab/planner-for-relevant-policies), [FONDSAT](https://github.com/tomsons22/FOND-SAT), or [CFOND-ASP](https://github.com/ssardina-research/cfond-asp)) that are are based on the SAS translator in [Fast-Downard](https://github.com/aibasel/downward) classical planner and produce a SAS encoding of the determinization of a specific instance planning problem. For these determinizers that output SAS encodings, please refer to the individual planners or the [translator-fond](https://github.com/ssardina-research/translator-fond) repo.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The system accepts effects that are an arbitrary nesting of `oneof`, conditional effects, and `and`. See section [Format allowed on effects](#format-allowed-on-effects) at the bottom about format accepted.

## Install

The fond-utils system can be installed (as a package) directly from its [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/fond-utils/) repository:

```shell
$ pip install fond-utils
```

Alternatively, it can be installed directly from the repo:

```shell
$ pip install git+https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
```

or, clone the repository and install:

```shell
$ git clone https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
$ cd fond-utils
$ pip install .
```

The system already includes a CLI console application `fond-utils` that will generally be the tool to use. To check the installation was successful just run:

```shell
$ fond-utils -h
usage: fond-utils [-h] --input INPUT [--output OUTPUT] [--outproblem OUTPROBLEM] [--prefix PREFIX] [--suffix SUFFIX]
                  [--console]
                  {check,determinize,normalize}

Utilities to process FOND PDDL

positional arguments:
  {check,determinize,normalize}

options:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --input INPUT         Input domain file
  --output OUTPUT       Output domain file
  --outproblem OUTPROBLEM
                        Optional output problem file
  --prefix PREFIX       Prefix for determinized action outcome identifier (Default: _DETDUP_)
  --suffix SUFFIX       Suffix for determinized action outcome identifier
  --console             Print the domain after processing
```

> [!NOTE]
> The scripts on this system relies on the [pddl](https://github.com/AI-Planning/pddl) parser, which can be easily installed via [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/pddl/) repository (`pip install pddl`). The pddl system relies itself on the [lark](https://lark-parser.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) parsing library. The fond-utils system, however, extends `pddl` to accept single files containing _both_ the domain and the problem instance, and will be extended further to accept labelled outcomes in the effects.

## Quickstart

You can use the fond-utils package in two ways: as a library, and as a CLI tool.

### As a CLI application tool

To just check that the PDDL input file is parsed well, use the command `check` and report to console:

```shell
$ fond-utils check --input https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils/refs/heads/main/tests/domain_03.pddl
```

Since the system is provided as a module `fondutils`, this would be equivalent to:

```shell
$ python -m fondutils check --input https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils/refs/heads/main/tests/domain_03.pddl
```

Note this would work if you have cloned the repo rather than installed the actual package; for example:

```shell
$ git clone https://github.com/AI-Planning/fond-utils
$ cd fond-utils
$ python -m fondutils check --input tests/domain_03.pddl
```

### Normalize a domain

To simply perform normalization (i.e., have a single top-level `oneof` clause in the effect):

```shell
$ fond-utils normalize --input tests/domain_05.pddl --output normalized-domain.pddl
```

Example `test/domain_05.pddl` includes some complex (nested) `oneof` effects. The name of the normalized domain will be the original name with suffix `_NORM`.

### All-outcome determinization

To perform the determinization, use the command `determinize`:

```shell
$ fond-utils determinize --input tests/domain_03.pddl --output determinized-domain.pddl
```

The name of the determinized domain will be the original name with a possible suffix separated with an underscore (default `_ALLOUT`).

The deterministic versions of a non-deterministic action are enumerated (starting from 1) with possible prefix and suffix on the number, each part separated with an underscore `_`. For example, the third deterministic action of operator `move` would be named `move_<PREFIX>_3_<SUFFIX>`; if no prefix or suffix is set, it would be just `move_3`.

> [!TIP]
> To change the default prefix `DETDUP` use the options `--prefix`, and to add a suffix after the number, use `--suffix`. To get the resulting PDDL printed on console use `--console`:

```lisp
$ python -m fondutils determinize --input tests/domain_03.pddl --prefix "PRE" --suffix "SUF" --console
(define (domain blocks-domain_ALLOUT)
    (:requirements :equality :typing)
    (:types block)
    (:predicates (clear ?b - block)  (emptyhand) (holding ?b - block)  (on ?b1 - block ?b2 - block)  (on-table ?b - block))
    (:action pick-up_PRE_1_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and (holding ?b1) (clear ?b2) (not (emptyhand)) (not (clear ?b1)) (not (on ?b1 ?b2)))
    )
     (:action pick-up_PRE_2_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and (clear ?b2) (on-table ?b1) (not (on ?b1 ?b2)))
    )
     (:action pick-up_PRE_3_SUF_
        :parameters (?b1 - block ?b2 - block)
        :precondition (and (not (= ?b1 ?b2)) (emptyhand) (clear ?b1) (on ?b1 ?b2))
        :effect (and )
    )
     (:action put-down
        :parameters (?b - block)
        :precondition (holding ?b)
        :effect (and (on-table ?b) (emptyhand) (clear ?b) (not (holding ?b)))
    )
)
...
```

This resulting PDDL domain is now deterministic and can then be used as input to the original [Fast-Downward](https://github.com/aibasel/downward) SAS translator.

### As a library

This is an example of how we can normalize and determinize a PDDL non-deterministic domain programmatically:

```python
import io
import inspect
from pathlib import Path
import requests

from pddl.formatter import domain_to_string
from fondutils.pddl import parse_domain_problem
from fondutils.determizer import determinize
from fondutils.normalizer import normalize

# get a domain from AI-Planning/fond-domains repo
URL_DOMAIN = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AI-Planning/fond-domains/refs/heads/main/benchmarks/blocksworld-2/domain.pddl"
r = requests.get(URL_DOMAIN)
domain_file = io.StringIO(r.content.decode("utf-8"))

domain, _ = parse_domain_problem(domain_file)

# compute the normalization of the domain and print it on console
domain_norm = normalize(domain)
print(domain_to_string(domain_norm))

# compute the determinization of the domain and print it on console
domain_det = determinize(domain)
print(domain_to_string(domain_det))
```

Note the above code uses `fondutils.pddl.parse_domain_problem` for parsing, which can handle files containing both the domain and problem (though in the above example we the file only contains a domain).

## Format allowed on effects

The determinizer accepts effects that are an arbitrary nesting of `oneof`, conditional effects, and `and`.

If the effect is just one `oneof` clause, then it corresponds to the Unary Nondeterminism (1ND) Normal Form without conditionals in:

* Jussi Rintanen: [Expressive Equivalence of Formalisms for Planning with Sensing](https://gki.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/papers/Rintanen03expr.pdf). ICAPS 2003: 185-194

When there are many `oneof` clauses in a top-level `and` effect, the cross-product of all the `oneof` clauses will determine the deterministic actions.

## Authors

* **Sebastian Sardina** ([ssardina](https://github.com/ssardina)) - [RMIT University](https://www.rmit.edu.au)
* **Christian Muise** ([haz](https://github.com/haz)) - [Queen's University](https://www.queensu.ca)
